[3.3.6]-[3.4.8] Exercises Discrete random variables

6. Show that var(a + X) = var(X) for any random variable X and constant a.

7. Arbitrage. Suppose you find a warm-hearted bookmaker offering payoff odds of (k) against
the kth horse in an n-horse race where rel {(k) + 1}-! < 1. Show that you can distribute your
bets in such a way as to ensure you win.

8. You roll a conventional fair die repeatedly. If it shows 1, you must stop, but you may choose to
stop at any prior time. Your score is the number shown by the die on the final roll. What stopping
strategy yields the greatest expected score? What strategy would you use if your score were the square
of the final roll?

9. Continuing with Exercise (8), suppose now that you lose c points from your score each time you
roll the die. What strategy maximizes the expected final score if ¢ = 5? What is the best strategy if
c=1?

3.4 Exercises. Indicators and matching

1. A biased coin is tossed ” times, and heads shows with probability p on each toss. A run isa
sequence of throws which result in the same outcome, so that, for example, the sequence HHTHTTH
contains five runs. Show that the expected number of runs is 1 + 2(n — 1) p(1 — p). Find the variance
of the number of runs.

2. Anurn contains 7 balls numbered 1, 2, ...,. Weremove k balls at random (without replacement)
and add up their numbers. Find the mean and variance of the total.

3. Of the 2n people in a given collection of n couples, exactly m die. Assuming that the m have
been picked at random, find the mean number of surviving couples. This problem was formulated by
Daniel Bernoulli in 1768.

4. Urn R contains n red balls and urn B contains n blue balls. At each stage, a ball is selected at
random from each urn, and they are swapped. Show that the mean number of red balls in urn R after

stage k is zn{l + (1 -2/ nyk }. This ‘diffusion model’ was described by Daniel Bernoulli in 1769.

5. Consider a square with diagonals, with distinct source and sink. Each edge represents a component
which is working correctly with probability p, independently of all other components. Write down an
expression for the Boolean function which equals 1 if and only if there is a working path from source
to sink, in terms of the indicator functions X; of the events {edge i is working} as i runs over the set
of edges. Hence calculate the reliability of the network.

6. A system is called a ‘k out of n’ system if it contains n components and it works whenever k or
more of these components are working. Suppose that each component is working with probability
p, independently of the other components, and let X, be the indicator function of the event that
component c is working. Find, in terms of the X,, the indicator function of the event that the system
works, and deduce the reliability of the system.

7. The probabilistic method. Let G = (V, EZ) bea finite graph. For any set W of vertices and any
edge e € E, define the indicator function

1 if e connects W and W°,

0 otherwise.

Iw(e) = {

Set Nw = Yicce Iw(e). Show that there exists W C V such that Nw > sIEl.

8. A total of n bar magnets are placed end to end in a line with random independent orientations.
Adjacent like poles repel, ends with opposite polarities join to form blocks. Let X be the number of
blocks of joined magnets. Find E(X) and var(X).

18

