[2.7.14]-[2.7.18] Exercises Random variables and their distributions

(b) Total variation distance. Let X and Y be integer-valued random variables, and let

dpy(X,Y) = So|P(X =k) - PY =).
k

Show that dry satisfies (i) and (iii) with S the space of integer-valued random variables, and that
dyy(X, Y) = 0 if and only if P(X = Y) = 1. Thus dry is a metric on the space of equivalence
classes of S with equivalence relation given by X ~ Y if P(X = Y) = 1. We call dtvy the total
variation distance.

Show that
dry(X, Y) =2 sup |P(X € A) — P(Y € A).
ACZ

14, Ascertain in the following cases whether or not F is the joint distribution function of some pair
(X, Y) of random variables. If your conclusion is affirmative, find the distribution functions of X and
Y separately.

1—e7*-¥ ifx,y > 0,
a Fa,y= _
(a) (y) { 0 otherwise.
l-e*—xe if0<x<y,
(b) Fa,y)=4 1l-e%-ye if0<y<x,
0 otherwise.
15. Itis required to place in order n books By, Bo, ..., By on alibrary shelf in such a way that readers

searching from left to right waste as little time as possible on average. Assuming that each reader
requires book B; with probability p,, find the ordering of the books which minimizes P(T = k) for
all k, where T is the (random) number of titles examined by a reader before discovery of the required
book.

16. Transitive coins. Three coins each show heads with probability 3 and tails otherwise. The first
counts 10 points for a head and 2 for a tail, the second counts 4 points for both head and tail, and the
third counts 3 points for a head and 20 for a tail.

You and your opponent each choose a coin; you cannot choose the same coin. Each of you tosses
your coin and the person with the larger score wins £ 10!°, Would you prefer to be the first to pick a
coin or the second?

17. Before the development of radar and inertial navigation, flying to isolated islands (for example,
from Los Angeles to Hawaii) was somewhat ‘hit or miss’. In heavy cloud or at night it was necessary
to fly by dead reckoning, and then to search the surface. With the aid of a radio, the pilot had a good
idea of the correct great circle along which to search, but could not be sure which of the two directions
along this great circle was correct (since a strong tailwind could have carried the plane over its target).
When you are the pilot, you calculate that you can make n searches before your plane will run out of
fuel. On each search you will discover the island with probability p (if it is indeed in the direction of
the search) independently of the results of other searches; you estimate initially that there is probability
a that the island is ahead of you. What policy should you adopt in deciding the directions of your
various searches in order to maximize the probability of locating the island?

18. Eight pawns are placed randomly on a chessboard, no more than one to a square. What is the
probability that:

(a) they are in a straight line (do not forget the diagonals)?

(b) no two are in the same row or column?

14

