Problems Exercises [1.8.23]-[1.8.31]

(a) What is the probability that this cherry contains a stone?
(b) Given that this cherry contains a stone, what is the probability that the pig consumed at least one
stone?

23. The ‘ménages’ problem poses the following question. Some consider it to be desirable that men
and women alternate when seated at a circular table. If n couples are seated randomly according to
this rule, show that the probability that nobody sits next to his or her partner is

1< p 2n {2n-k
mi aD sel k Jaw

You may find it useful to show first that the number of ways of selecting k non-overlapping pairs of
adjacent seats is ors i) 2n(Qn —k)7!.

24. Anurn contains D blue balls andr red balls. They are removed at random and not replaced. Show
that the probability that the first red ball drawn is the (k + 1)th ball drawn equals ("*?—*-') / (?°).
Find the probability that the last ball drawn is red.

25. An urn contains a azure balls and c carmine balls, where ac 4 0. Balls are removed at random
and discarded until the first time that a ball (B, say) is removed having a different colour from its
predecessor. The ball B is now replaced and the procedure restarted. This process continues until the
last ball is drawn from the urn. Show that this last ball is equally likely to be azure or carmine.

26. Protocols. A pack of four cards contains one spade, one club, and the two red aces. You deal
two cards faces downwards at random in front of a truthful friend. She inspects them and tells you
that one of them is the ace of hearts. What is the chance that the other card is the ace of diamonds?
Perhaps 5?

Suppose that your friend’s protocol was:
(a) with no red ace, say “no red ace”,
(b) with the ace of hearts, say “ace of hearts”,
(c) with the ace of diamonds but not the ace of hearts, say “ace of diamonds”.
Show that the probability in question is 5.

Devise a possible protocol for your friend such that the probability in question is zero.

27. Eddington’s controversy. Four witnesses, A, B, C, and D, at a trial each speak the truth with
probability 4 independently of each other. In their testimonies, A claimed that B denied that C declared
that D lied. What is the (conditional) probability that D told the truth? [This problem seems to have
appeared first as a parody in a university magazine of the ‘typical’ Cambridge Philosophy Tripos
question.]

28. The probabilistic method. 10 per cent of the surface of a sphere is coloured blue, the rest is red.
Show that, irrespective of the manner in which the colours are distributed, it is possible to inscribe a
cube in S with all its vertices red.

29. Repulsion. The event A is said to be repelled by the event B if P(A | B) < P(A), and to be
attracted by B if P(A | B) > P(A). Show that if B attracts A, then A attracts B, and B® repels A.

If A attracts B, and B attracts C, does A attract C?
30. Birthdays. If m students born on independent days in 1991 are attending a lecture, show that the
probability that at least two of them share a birthday is p = 1 — (365)!/{(365 — m)! 365}. Show
that p > 5 when m = 23.
31. Lottery. You choose r of the first n positive integers, and a lottery chooses a random subset L of
the same size. What is the probability that:
(a) L includes no consecutive integers?
