[1.5.8]-[1.8.3] Exercises Events and their probabilities

(a) Show that A is independent of B, and that B is independent of C.
(b) Is A independent of C?

(c) Do these results hold if boys and girls are not equally likely?

(d) Do these results hold if Jane has four children?

8. Galton’s paradox. You flip three fair coins. At least two are alike, and it is an evens chance that
the third is a head or a tail. Therefore P(all alike) = }. Do you agree?

9. Two fair dice are rolled. Show that the event that their sum is 7 is independent of the score shown
by the first die.

1.7 Exercises. Worked examples

1. There are two roads from A to B and two roads from B to C. Each of the four roads is blocked by
snow with probability p, independently of the others. Find the probability that there is an open road
from A to B given that there is no open route from A to C.

If, in addition, there is a direct road from A to C, this road being blocked with probability p
independently of the others, find the required conditional probability.

2. Calculate the probability that a hand of 13 cards dealt from a normal shuffled pack of 52 contains
exactly two kings and one ace. What is the probability that it contains exactly one ace given that it
contains exactly two kings?

3. Asymmetric random walk takes place on the integers 0, 1, 2, ..., N with absorbing barriers at 0
and N, starting at k. Show that the probability that the walk is never absorbed is zero.

4. The so-called ‘sure thing principle’ asserts that if you prefer x to y given C, and also prefer x to
y given C°, then you surely prefer x to y. Agreed?

5. A pack contains m cards, labelled 1,2,...,m. The cards are dealt out in a random order, one
by one. Given that the label of the kth card dealt is the largest of the first k cards dealt, what is the
probability that it is also the largest in the pack?

1.8 Problems

1. A traditional fair die is thrown twice. What is the probability that:
(a) a six tums up exactly once?

(b) both numbers are odd?

(c) the sum of the scores is 4?

(d) the sum of the scores is divisible by 3?

2. A fair coin is thrown repeatedly. What is the probability that on the nth throw:
(a) ahead appears for the first time?

(b) the numbers of heads and tails to date are equal?

(c) exactly two heads have appeared altogether to date?

(d) at least two heads have appeared to date?

3. Let Fand ¢ be o-fields of subsets of Q.

(a) Use elementary set operations to show that ¥ is closed under countable intersections; that is, if
Aj, A2,... are in F, then so is (}; A;.-

(b) Let H = FN G be the collection of subsets of Q lying in both F and 3. Show that # is a o-field.

(c) Show that FU G, the collection of subsets of Q lying in either F or G, is not necessarily a o-field.

4

