Preface

This book contains more than 1000 exercises in probability and random processes, together
with their solutions. Apart from being a volume of worked exercises in its own right, it is
also a solutions manual for exercises and problems appearing in our textbook Probability and
Random Processes (3rd edn), Oxford University Press, 2001, henceforth referred to as PRP.
These exercises are not merely for drill, but complement and illustrate the text of PRP, or are
entertaining, or both. The current volume extends our earlier book Probability and Random
Processes: Problems and Solutions, and includes in addition around 400 new problems. Since
many exercises have multiple parts, the total number of interrogatives exceeds 3000.

Despite being intended in part as a companion to PRP, the present volume is as self-
contained as reasonably possible. Where knowledge of a substantial chunk of bookwork is
unavoidable, the reader is provided with a reference to the relevant passage in PRP. Expressions
such as ‘clearly’ appear frequently in the solutions. Although we do not use such terms in
their Laplacian sense to mean ‘with difficulty’, to call something ‘clear’ is not to imply that
explicit verification is necessarily free of tedium.

The table of contents reproduces that of PRP; the section and exercise numbers corre-
spond to those of PRP; there are occasional references to examples and equations in PRP.
The covered range of topics is broad, beginning with the elementary theory of probability
and random variables, and continuing, via chapters on Markov chains and convergence, to
extensive sections devoted to stationarity and ergodic theory, renewals, queues, martingales,
and diffusions, including an introduction to the pricing of options. Generally speaking, exer-
cises are questions which test knowledge of particular pieces of theory, while problems are
less specific in their requirements. There are questions of all standards, the great majority
being elementary or of intermediate difficulty. We ourselves have found some of the later
ones to be rather tricky, but have refrained from magnifying any difficulty by adding asterisks
or equivalent devices. If you are using this book for self-study, our advice would be not to
attempt more than a respectable fraction of these at a first read.

We pay tribute to all those anonymous pedagogues whose examination papers, work
assignments, and textbooks have been so influential in the shaping of this collection. To them
and to their successors we wish, in turn, much happy plundering. If you find errors, try to
keep them secret, except from us. If you know a better solution to any exercise, we will be
happy to substitute it in a later edition.

We acknowledge the expertise of Sarah Shea-Simonds in preparing the TEXscript of this
volume, and of Andy Burbanks in advising on the front cover design, which depicts a favourite
confluence of the authors.

Cambridge and Oxford G.R.G.
April 2001 D.R.S.

