[11.5.3]-[11.7.5] Exercises Queues

of queues to deduce for the former queue that: (a) the waiting-time distribution is a mixture of an
exponential distribution and an atom at zero, and (b) the equilibrium queue length is geometric.

3. Consider G/M(w)/1, and let G be the distribution function of S — X where S and X are typical
(independent) service and interarrival times. Show that the Wiener—-Hopf equation

F(x) = [ F(x—y)dG(y), x >0,

—w

for the limiting waiting-time distribution F is satisfied by F(x) = 1 — ne~#('-™)*, x > 0. Here, 7
is the smallest positive root of the equation x = My(y(x — 1)), where My is the moment generating
function of X.

11.6 Exercise. Heavy traffic

1. Consider the M(A)/M(j2)/1 queue with p = A/u < 1. Let Qp be a random variable with the
equilibrium queue distribution, and show that (1 — ¢)Q» converges in distribution as p ¢ 1, the limit
distribution being exponential with parameter 1.

11.7 Exercises. Networks of queues

1. Consider an open migration process with c stations, in which individuals arrive at station j at
rate v;, individuals move from i to j at rate 1;;;(n;), and individuals depart from i at rate 42;;(7;),
where n; denotes the number of individuals currently at station i. Show when ¢;(n;) = n; for all i
that the system behaves as though the customers move independently through the network. Identify
the explicit form of the stationary distribution, subject to an assumption of irreducibility, and explain
a connection with the Bartlett theorem of Problem (8.7.6).

2. Let Q be an M(A)/M(j2)/s queue where A < sj, and assume Q is in equilibrium. Show that
the process of departures is a Poisson process with intensity 4, and that departures up to time f are
independent of the value of Q(t).

3. Customers arrive in the manner of a Poisson process with intensity A in a shop having two servers.
The service times of these servers are independent and exponentially distributed with respective
parameters jt; and 42. Arriving customers form a single queue, and the person at the head of the
queue moves to the first free server. When both servers are free, the next arrival is allocated a server
chosen according to one of the following rules:

(a) each server is equally likely to be chosen,

(b) the server who has been free longer is chosen.

Assume that A < zy + j42, and the process is in equilibrium. Show in each case that the process of
departures from the shop is a Poisson process, and that departures prior to time t are independent of
the number of people in the shop at time ft.

4. Difficult customers. Consider an M(A)/M(jz)/1 queue modified so that on completion of service
the customer leaves with probability 5, or rejoins the queue with probability 1-3. Find the distribution
of the total time a customer spends being served. Hence show that equilibrium is possible if 4 < éu,
and find the stationary distribution. Show that, in equilibrium, the departure process is Poisson, but if
the rejoining customer goes to the end of the queue, the composite arrival process is not Poisson.

5. Consider an open migration process in equilibrium. If there is no path by which an individual
at station k can reach station j, show that the stream of individuals moving directly from station j to
station k forms a Poisson process.

114
