[8.3.4]~[8.4.5] Exercises Random processes

4. Events occur at the times of a discrete-time renewal process N (see Example (5.2.15)). Let uy be
the probability of an event at time n, with generating function U(s), and let F(s) be the probability
generating function of a typical inter-event time. Show that, if |sj < 1:

oo oo k
y E(N(r))s" = a and > E (rn) six ae fork > 0.
—s5 _
=0

r=0

5. Prove Theorem (8.3.5): Poisson processes are the only renewal processes that are Markov chains.

8.4 Exercises. Queues

1. The two tellers in a bank each take an exponentially distributed time to deal with any customer;
their parameters are A and jz respectively. You arrive to find exactly two customers present, each
occupying a teller.

(a) You take a fancy to arandomly chosen teller, and queue for that teller to be free; no later switching
is permitted. Assuming any necessary independence, what is the probability p that you are the
last of the three customers to leave the bank?

(b) If you choose to be served by the quicker teller, find p.

(c) Suppose you go to the teller who becomes free first. Find p.

2. Customers arrive at a desk according to a Poisson process of intensity 1. There is one clerk, and
the service times are independent and exponentially distributed with parameter . At time 0 there is
exactly one customer, currently in service. Show that the probability that the next customer arrives
before time ¢ and finds the clerk busy is

Xr

d—- e Ot Ey
A+ Mb

3. Vehicles pass a crossing at the instants of a Poisson process of intensity A; you need a gap of
length at least a in order to cross. Let T be the first time at which you could succeed in crossing to
the other side. Show that E(T) = (e@* — 1)/A, and find Eel),

Suppose there are two lanes to cross, carrying independent Poissonian traffic with respective rates
i and jt. Find the expected time to cross in the two cases when: (a) there is an island or refuge between
the two lanes, (b) you must cross both in one go. Which is the greater?

4. Customers arrive at the instants of a Poisson process of intensity 4, and the single server has
exponential service times with parameter y. An arriving customer who sees n customers present
(including anyone in service) will join the queue with probability (7 + 1)/(m + 2), otherwise leaving
for ever. Under what condition is there a stationary distribution? Find the mean of the time spent in
the queue (not including service time) by a customer who joins it when the queue is in equilibrium.
What is the probability that an arrival joins the queue when in equilibrium?

5. Customers enter a shop at the instants of a Poisson process of rate 2. At the door, two represen-
tatives separately demonstrate a new corkscrew. This typically occupies the time of a customer and
the representative for a period which is exponentially distributed with parameter 1, independently of
arrivals and other demonstrators. If both representatives are busy, customers pass directly into the
shop. No customer passes a free representative without being stopped, and all customers leave by
another door. If both representatives are free at time 0, show the probability that both are busy at time

‘2 2,-2t 4 ,—-St
tis g — ze + 75e .

98
